---
title: 'Introduction'
date: '2023-02-27'
draft: false
---

Delivering on-demand services well is never easy. Your success hinges on having
both the capability and capacity to deliver what your customer needs while doing
so at high speed with the consistency, reliability, security, privacy, and cost
effectiveness that they expect. This is just as true whether you are providing
an IT service or a more traditional courier or electric utility service.

However, unlike more traditional services, IT service providers are far less
restricted by organizational size or physical location. With so many quickly
deployable tools and cloud capabilities available, even the smallest IT service
providers can now instantly scale to address nearly any identified market need
globally.

Where IT service delivery providers do struggle is predictably and reliably
delivering services that match customer expectations. This, of course, matters.
No one wants the frustration and disappointment of a service that falls short of
what is needed. What makes this particularly frustrating is that such shortfalls
are not caused by misunderstanding the market need or the functionality
customers are looking for. If anything, IT is flooded by tools and techniques
that allow businesses to analyze and validate ideas quickly. Instead, the
problems arise from awareness gaps caused by the way organizations deliver and
manage the services themselves.

As IT service stacks grow in complexity, it becomes far more difficult to
determine, let alone ensure, that the dynamics between service components and
the delivery ecosystem match what the customer expected. Rather than put
measures in place to improve their awareness and understanding of these
dynamics, delivery teams have focused on other factors like delivering more
faster, using the latest cloud technologies and architectural approaches, or
adopting the process or methodology most in fashion. Unfortunately, in the
process the delivery teams unknowingly create further disconnects that fragment
the information flow and context necessary to understand those dynamics.

As the resulting gap between what delivery teams *believe* they are providing
and what is *actually* delivered grows, the team's ability to maintain
sufficient context to make effective decisions steadily degrades. Even when
disconnects are found, organizations often double down on more processes and
misunderstood tooling that do little to effectively bridge the gaps. This
creates a vicious loop that creates more frustration as the team drifts further
away from being able to deliver to meet customer expectations.

## Learning How to See

It is not inevitable that delivery teams have to fall into such a dysfunctional
spiral. To break the cycle, you first need to understand the many ways you can
lose your situational awareness, from deeply entrenched bad habits that fragment
information flow to biases and perceptions that distort your understanding of a
situation and what is important. Only then can you begin to put measures in
place to counteract these tendencies and improve everyone's situational
awareness.

Sharpening your situational awareness is like gaining a new sense or superpower
you never knew you had. I like to think of it as learning how to see.

The primary objective of this book is to help you on that journey so that you
and your organization can close the awareness gap and deliver services that your
customers can use to reach their target outcomes. This book is geared primarily
for two audiences. The first comprises the individual contributors, like
software developers and IT Operations staff, who are in the trenches delivering
the services. The other key audience comprises the managers and leaders who are
responsible for building and directing those delivery teams.

For individual contributors the journey begins by looking at the delivery
process itself. The first step is how you determine the objective of the work
you are performing. Can it be used to check how well what is delivered aligns
with the target outcomes of the customer, or are the measures more
output-focused, such as the number of features or service uptime? Then there are
the ways you acquire, understand, learn, and improve your ability to deliver.
There are a number of misperceptions that inject flaws into our decision making,
and ultimately the effectiveness of our actions.

To break this cycle, in this book you will find various techniques to help you
measure and improve your situational awareness and the quality of information
flow across your organization so that you are able to make better delivery
decisions that move your services closer toward meeting your customer's target
outcomes. Along the way many of the excuses people make for not changing their
behavior and way of working, from managing work to governance procedures, will
be debunked so that you and the team can continue to make progress.

Here, managers and delivery leadership will find strategies to help delivery
teams spot and eliminate awareness gaps and misalignments that hinder effective
delivery. This begins by identifying the various problems that arise from many
of the management styles, requirements management techniques, processes,
communication styles, and incentive structures that have traditionally be relied
upon to direct and control people. These lead to poor decision making, conflict,
reduced learning and improvement, and ultimately failure to deliver in a way
that meets customer expectations. You will also learn about the power of Mission
Command, as well as ways to communicate, inspire, and support the members of
your team to effectively deliver to the organization's vision and the outcomes
customers are trying to achieve.

Those who do not fit neatly in one of the two audiences described likely will
also find value within these pages. For example, you might uncover and correct
your own misperceptions about service delivery. This can help you better
understand and more effectively interact with service delivery teams.

The thinking and techniques in this book are part of the larger Mobius outcome
delivery approach, which you can find at <https://mobiusloop.com>. Mobius has
been developed by a community dedicated to harnessing the power of innovation
and delivery excellence to more effectively achieve the outcomes that matter.

## How to Use This Book

This book can be divided into three parts. The first part introduces the key
dynamics that underlie the service delivery challenge. It sets the scene for how
those of us in IT service delivery are constantly in danger of focusing far too
much on removing delivery friction or reducing perceived delivery risk, often at
the cost of maintaining situational awareness and ensuring teams have the
ability to learn and improve.

Understanding these dynamics is important for any IT service delivery
organization, and especially for those that wish to pursue the promise of
DevOps. Overlooking them and missing their effects are what causes so many who
pursue DevOps and Agile delivery approaches to fail to meet their promise from
the start. This lack of awareness and appreciation of the way they can distort
how we perceive the delivery ecosystem is also where many automation tooling and
artificial intelligence/machine learning (AI/ML) approaches so often fail.

The second part of the book dives into each of the key elements and the role
they play in service delivery. It explores their importance, how they are so
often misapplied, and the repercussions to service delivery and the team. I
personally feel that this is the most important part of the book, and the one
that is so often missing from most guides out there.

The third and last part of the book is a practical guide to help you improve
your own service delivery effectiveness. It includes ways to determine the
maturity of your team to ensure you have the key elements in place to deliver
consistently and effectively. It also has a number of suggestions for how to
organize and manage the flow of work, build and deploy instrumentation and
automation solutions, and deal with governance associated with internal controls
and those required to meet legal and regulatory requirements.

## My Own Journey

This book draws from my own journey working in the trenches as an individual
contributor and, later, a technical leader to build great IT services and
improve the effectiveness of the teams delivering them. I know from firsthand
experience that every ecosystem has different challenges, and what I have
learned from my own missteps along the way have kept me level-headed and
practical. More than anything, I want this book to be a useful addition to your
bookshelf for a long time. This is why the focus of this book is to help you
better understand your circumstances so that you and your organization can
deliver more effectively, not to talk about some specific process or set of
technology that will quickly be supplanted by the next big fad.

I have been blessed throughout my career to have met and worked alongside a
number of people far smarter than I am who early on in my career exposed me to
revolutionary concepts and ways of working. Some had worked alongside John
Boyd's "Fighter Mafia." Others were Training Within Industry (TWI) veterans, or
had to come up with ways to deliver highly reliable services long before the
existence of concepts like cloud computing or continuous delivery. Only later
did I realize that what I learned along the way is what has allowed me to
quickly cut through delivery ecosystem noise to help teams overcome seemingly
intractable problems. At times it has felt like a superpower, one that I hope I
can share to help you reduce your own delivery pain and frustration to secure
success.
